.TH XGVis 1 "20 November 1998"
.SH NAME
.B xgvis
\- interactive multidimensional scaling using xgobi for display
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xgvis
[
.B \-dims
n
] [
.B \-stepsize
x
]
fname
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I xgvis
is an interactive multidimensional scaling (MDS) program that
consists of a control panel to manipulate the parameters of the
MDS stress function and an xgobi window for data display.  It
can be used either for visualization of dissimilarity data, for
dimension reduction, or for graph layout.  Graph layout is
usually done in 2D, but xgvis allows layouts in arbitrary
dimensions, 3D being the default.  It permits missing values,
which can be used to implement multidimensional unfolding.

It is used as follows:
.RS .25i
.IP o 2
Start up with a user-supplied or random starting configuration.
.IP o 2
Initiate MDS optimization.  As the optimization algorithm does
its work, observe both the changing stress values and the animated point
configuration.
.IP o 2
Examine the optimized configuration with 3D rotations and
grand tours and drill-down operations such as labeling and linked brushing.
.IP o 2
Enhance the configuration with glyphs, colors and lines for interpretation.
.IP o 2
Modifiy the dissimilarities, the stress function, and/or the 
configuration by
.RE
.RS .6i
.IP - 2
transforming the dissimilarities
.IP - 2
choosing weights or cutting extreme dissimilarities
.IP - 2
restricting MDS to subsets
.IP - 2
hand editing the existing configuration or
.IP - 2
selecting a new random configuration
.RE
.SH OPTIONS

.B \-dims
n
.LP
.RS .25i
Specify n, the dimensionality of the embedding space.
By default, its value is 3.
.RE

.B \-stepsize
x
.LP
.RS .25i
Specify the initial stepsize; its default value is 0.1.
.RE

.SH FILES
XGVis uses a set of input files with a common root (which we'll call
.B fname
in the man page) and a suffix.  First, each set must contain a file
with the suffix .edges, .dat or .dist.
.RE

.nf
.B  fname.dist
.fi
.RS .25i
Distance matrix: an n x n matrix, with entries separated by
white space and one row per line.
.RE

.nf
.B  fname.edges
.fi
.RS .25i
Line segments: specifications for the pattern of line segments which
connect pairs of points.  The file must contain at least two numbers per
line.  The first two numbers represent the row numbers of the two
points that should be connected.  (This is exactly like the structure
of a fname.lines file in xgobi.)  In addition, if a third number is
present, it is taken to be an edge weight.

If this line is present and the distance matrix is absent, then
the distance matrix is computed from it, with each
edge representing a distance of one.
.RE

.nf
.B fname.dat
.B fname.pos
.fi
.RS .25i
Starting positions:  an n x p matrix, with entries separated by
white space and one row per line. 

If this file is present and a distance file is absent, the
distance matrix is computed from it.
.RE

.nf
.B fname.lines
.fi
.RS .25i

Line segments: specifications for the pattern of line segments which
connect pairs of points.  If this file is present, then the edges
file is used to create the distance matrix but the lines file is
used to draw the edges.
.RE

Many additional files can be specified.  See the xgobi man
page for descriptions of 
.B fname.col
(variable labels),
.B fname.row
(case labels),
.B fname.colors
(glyph colors), and
.B fname.linecolors
(line colors),
in particular.

.RE
.SH AUTHORS
.nf
Andreas Buja (andreas@research.att.com)
Deborah Swayne (dfs@research.att.com)
.fi
.SH CONTACT
Deborah Swayne (dfs@research.att.com)
.SH SEE ALSO
Sample data files are included in the XGVis distribution.

For papers and further pointers, check the following web page:
.nf
http://www.research.att.com/areas/stat/xgobi/
.fi

.SH BUGS
Probably too numerous to mention, but you do the authors a favor if
you report the ones you notice.

